TODO.md, before:

- [x] change dump Arc 'database' to LSM with channels
- [x] add simple server logs
- [ ] write sstable after memtable is full
- [ ] index to track sstables
- [ ] forward 'get' to sstable index when no value in memtable
- [ ] add key value validations length
- [ ] add shutdown to server
- [ ] better logging to handle threads and put logs to file
- [ ] json response + schema
- [ ] compaction of old memtables
- [ ] make a statistics unit
  - [ ] keep track of reads from deep sstables to put frequent old values to cache for longer
  - [ ] keep track of average (or better median) key-value pair size to better predict the moment to flush memtable to disk (make it based on histogram)
- [ ] cache and cache strategies (prob on the sst blooms level - make a pool of hot blooms)
- [ ] add key-prefix optimization to sst (keys are ordered so we could save space on the same prefix of several keys)

notes for case study:
- first idea was to take AVL-tree for a memtable, but compared to std-lib BTreeMap performance should not be significantly better, so just stick with btreemap from the std
- shadow table is a concept to release the lock immediately while sstable is being compacted and written to disk.
- cache, memtable and shadow mem are always the same position. these are not present in index. index is only for sstables.
- is index entry a file name?
- paths to write to get from here: https://www.pathname.com/fhs/pub/fhs-2.3.html#THEVARHIERARCHY (/var)
- how to protect shadow table for the moment sstable is not yet written to disk

Commit message:

block encode/decode and layout changes

TODO.md, after:

- [x] change dump Arc 'database' to LSM with channels
- [x] add simple server logs
- [ ] write sstable after memtable is full
- [ ] index to track sstables
- [ ] forward 'get' to sstable index when no value in memtable
- [ ] add key value validations length (x > 0 && x < 256) and ascii
- [ ] add shutdown to server
- [ ] better logging to handle threads and put logs to file
- [ ] json response + schema
- [ ] compaction of old memtables
- [ ] make a statistics unit
  - [ ] keep track of reads from deep sstables to put frequent old values to cache for longer
  - [ ] keep track of average (or better median) key-value pair size to better predict the moment to flush memtable to disk (make it based on histogram)
- [ ] cache and cache strategies (prob on the sst blooms level - make a pool of hot blooms)
- [ ] add key-prefix optimization to sst (keys are ordered so we could save space on the same prefix of several keys)

notes for case study:
- first idea was to take AVL-tree for a memtable, but compared to std-lib BTreeMap performance should not be significantly better, so just stick with btreemap from the std
- shadow table is a concept to release the lock immediately while sstable is being compacted and written to disk.
- cache, memtable and shadow mem are always the same position. these are not present in index. index is only for sstables.
- is index entry a file name?
- paths to write to get from here: https://www.pathname.com/fhs/pub/fhs-2.3.html#THEVARHIERARCHY (/var)
- how to protect shadow table for the moment sstable is not yet written to disk
- blocks and table layout made that way that the first data is needed to the engine placed first. so that db only make small reads before reading the whole table.
